First concept and exercise (#17)
exercism/jq: concepts/basics/about.md

# Introduction

jq works by passing the incoming JSON data through a _single expression_ (written as a _pipeline of filters_) to achieve the desired transformed data.

## Filters and Pipes

Filters are also known as Expressions.

A filter takes an input and produces an output.

> Similar to a unix shell, join filters with a pipe `|` to connect the output of one filter to the input of another.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to with a unix shell, you join filters with a pipe `|` to connect the output of one filter to the input of another.
```

### The Identity Filter: `.`

This is the simplest filter.
It simply passes its input to its output.

> `jq` is quite handy to use just as a JSON pretty-printer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, `jq` pretty-prints JSON by default, so passing JSON via the `.` filter gives some nice pretty output for free!
```

(Just to keep the focus on the filter in the text)

```sh
$ echo '[1, 2, 3]' | jq '.'
[
  1,
  2,
  3
]
```

### Arrays

> Array elements are accessed with brackets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Array elements are accessed with brackets, and are zero-indexed.
```

```sh
$ echo '[10, 20, 30]' | jq '.[1]'
20
```

Array slices use a colon and return the subarray _from_ (inclusive) _to_ (exclusive)

```sh
$ echo '[0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50]' | jq '.[1:4]'
[
  10,
  20,
  30
]
```

A filter can build an array by wrapping an expression in `[` and `]`

* with a known list of elements:

    ```sh

>     jq -n '[1, 2, 3]'

Reviewer: At this point I'm thinking "what's `-`?"

    ```

* to collect a stream of elements: for example,
    [`range`][man-range] is a function that outputs a stream of numbers

    ```sh
    $ jq -n 'range(10; 70; 15)'
    10
    25
    40
    55
    ```

>     Collect them in an array

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ...and using `[]` collects them in an array:
```

    
    ```sh
    $ jq -c -n '[range(10; 70; 15)]'
    [10,25,40,55]
    ```

~~~~exercism/note
The comma is not just syntax that separates array elements.
Comma is an **operator** that joins streams.

For example `[1, 2, 3]` is a filter that uses the array constructor `[]`
to collect the result of the concatenation of the three expressions `1`, `2`
and `3`.
~~~~

### Objects

Similar to many programming languages, use dots to access object properties

```sh
$ echo '{"foo": {"bar": "qux"}}' | jq '.foo.bar'
"qux"
```

Brackets can be used for objects too, but then quotes are needed for string literals:

```sh
$ echo '{"foo": {"bar": "qux"}}' | jq '.["foo"]["bar"]'
"qux"
```

> Construct an object with `{}` and `key: value` pairs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can construct an object with `{}` and `key: value` pairs.
```

(This just reads better IMO)

Quotes are not required around keys that are "simple" strings.

```sh
jq -n '{question: 6 * 9, answer: 42}'
```
outputs
```none
{
  "question": 54,
  "answer": 42
}
```

To treat the key as an expression, you must wrap it in parentheses
```sh
echo '[["question", "answer"], [54, 42]]' \
| jq '{(.[0][0]): .[1][0], (.[0][1]): .[1][1]}'
```

~~~~exercism/note
It is quite common to want to extract a subset of keys from a large object:
for example to extract the `id` and `name` from

```json
{
    "id": 101,
    "name": "alpha widget",
    "specifications": {...}
}
```

We can write
```jq
{id: .id, name: .name}
```
This is so common, there is shorthand syntax for it:
```jq
{id, name}
```
~~~~

### Pipelines

For example, given "file.json" containing

```json
{
    "key1": "value1",
    "key2": [5, 15, 25]
}
```

Let's now calculate the length of the key2 array:

```sh
$ echo '{"key1": "value1", "key2": [5, 15, 25]}' | \

>   jq -c '.key2 | length'

Reviewer: Also wondering what `-c` is.

3
```

We're _piping_ the output of the `.key2` expression as the input to [`length`][man-length], which unsurprisingly outputs the  number of elements in the array.

~~~~exercism/caution
This is an aspect of `jq` that takes some getting used to --
most (but not all) functions act like _filters_ where you pass data to the filter's input, not as an argument.
~~~~

### Filters can ignore their input

For example:

```sh
jq '6 * 9' <<< '{"answer": 42}'

> ```

Reviewer: This example is unclear to me. I don't know what `<<<` does.

### Filters can output streams of data

A filter can output more than one value.
For example, the `.[]` filter outputs each element of an array as a separate value:

```sh
$ jq -n -c '[1, 2, 3]'
[1,2,3]

$ jq -n -c '[1, 2, 3] | .[]'
1
2
3
```

Piping such a filter into another will execute the 2nd filter **_for each value_**:

```sh
$ jq -n -c '[1, 2, 3] | .[] | . * 2'
2
4
6

> ```

Reviewer: That's cool!

This is like implicit iteration.

> Once you grok this technique, you'll realize very powerful jq filters can be very concise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you understand this technique, you'll realize very powerful jq filters can be very concise.
```

(Just because I think lots of people don't know "grok" based on my experience of confused faces when I've used it in real life!

## Types

From [the manual][man-types]

> jq supports the same set of datatypes as JSON - numbers, strings, booleans, arrays, objects (which in JSON-speak are hashes with only string keys), and "null".

> We'll learn more about these in subsequent lessons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll learn more about these in subsequent exercises.
```

## Whitespace

Whitespace is not significant in `jq`.
Use spaces/tabs/newlines as you see fit to format your code.

> The author is unaware of any existing `jq` style guides.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are unaware of any existing `jq` style guides.
```

Reviewer: (Share the responsibility with me and Erik 😉)
